Case
----

Case: _________________________

Zoning Article to be varied from: ___________________


## Prong 1: Public interest 


"Explain how the proposed use does not conflict with the purpose of
the ordinance and how it must not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood, threaten public health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise
injure public rights".

-   Under **\[ Gray v Siedel 143 N.H. 327 (1999) \]**:

    -   Would the variance cause a benefit? IRRELEVANT

    -   Would the variance cause a harm? Y / N

-   Under **\[ Chester Rod and Gun Club, Inc. v. Town of Chester, 152
    N.H. 577 (2005) \]** , definition of "harm":

    -   Alter the essential character of the neighborhood? Y / N

    -   Threaten health? Y / N

    -   Threaten safety? Y / N

    -   Threaten general welfare of the public? Y / N

-   Under **\[ 1999 Municipal Law Update NHMA, October 1999 \]** "if the
    applicant makes even a conclusory statement \[ that it would not
    cause a harm \], that's enough unless abutters or board members
    identify some specific adverse effect"

    -   Does the applicant make a statement that it does not harm public
        interest? Y / N

    -   Does an abutter say that it does harm the public interest? Y / N

    -   Does a board member say that it does harm the public interest ?
        Y / N

    -   If the applicant says no harm and ANYONE else says there is
        harm, then the applicant has the burden of persuasion. Did the
        applicant persuade? Y / N

## Prong 2: Spirit of the ordinance

"Please describe how the spirit of the ordinance is observed".

-   What clause is the applicant seeking a variance from?
    (see top of document)

-   What is the spirit / objective of that clause? _____________________

-   Would this variance violate that spirit / objective? Y / N

-   **\[ Malachy Glen Associates, Inc. v. Town of Chichester, 155 NH
    102 (2007) \]** "One way to ascertain whether granting the
    variance would violate basic zoning objectives is to examine
    whether it would alter the essential character of the locality" \[
    apparently overlapping with prong 1\]

    -   What is the character of the locality?        _____________________

    -   Would this variance alter the character of the locality? Y / N

-   **\[ Maureen Bacon v. Town of Enfield, 150 N.H. 468 (2004) \]**
    "while a single X might not greatly affect Y, would the cumulative
    impact of many such projects?" ; "cumulative effect" or
    "cumulative impact" theory upheld in **\[ Perreault v. New
    Hampton, 171 NH 183 (2018) \]**

    -   Would every single lot on the road getting the same variance
        violate that objective? Y / N

## Prong 3: Substantial justice

"Please describe how substantial justice is done, because the benefits
to the applicant must not be outweighed by harm to the general public."

-   Any loss to the individual which is not outweighed by a gain to the
    general public is an injustice **\[ ZBANHaHfLO II-13 \] **

-   The injustice must be capable of relief by granting a variance that
    meets the other four qualifications. A board of adjustment cannot
    alleviate an injustice by granting an illegal variance. **\[
    ZBANHaHfLO II-13 \] **

-   ... and the variance might be illegal if the use is inconsistent
    with the area's present use **\[ ZBANHaHfLO II-13, II-14 ; Malachy
    Glen Associates v. Town of Chichester 155 N.H. 102 (2007) \] **

-   What benefit to the individual ? ________________________

-   What harm to the public ?    _________________________

-   Does the benefit outweigh the harm? Y / N

-   Is the proposed development consistent with the area's present use?
    Y / N

## Prong 4: Values of surrounding properties are not diminished

"describe how the values of the surrounding properties are not
diminished."

-   Does the applicant say that it will **not** diminish values? Y / N

-   Do 1 or more expert witnesses say that it will **not** diminish
    values? Y / N

-   Does any abutter or other person say that it **will** diminish
    values? Y / N

-   Do 1 or more expert witnesses say that it **will** diminish values?
    Y / N

-   Has the applicant convinced you that it is more likely than not that
    the project will not decrease values? Y / N

The ZBA is allowed to use its own knowledge to weigh / decide between
conflicting expert claims, but it can not overrule an expert claim on
one side if there is no dueling expert claim on the other side. **\[
citation: read this, need to find it \]**

## Prong 5: Hardship

### Uniqueness

"describe the special conditions of the property that distinguish it
from other properties in the area".

-   The applicant must explain what the special condition is (how this
    property differs from most others)

-   The hardship must be caused by a special condition ("uniqueness") of
    the property **\[ ZBANHaHfLO page III-16 , ZBANHaHfLO page D-2,
    Belanger v. Nashua, 121 N.H. 389 \[1981\] \]**

-   A hardship caused by the applicant's personal circumstances is NOT a
    valid hardship for this purpose **\[ ZBANHaHfLO page D-1, Ryan v.
    City of Manchester, 123 N.H. 170, 174 \[1983\] \]** ...except that
    personal circumstances of disability ARE allowed \[ **ZBANHaHfLO
    page II-16 \]**

-   If all other lots in the zoning district are similarly affected by
    the zoning ordinance so that there are no "special conditions"
    affecting the lot of the applicant, the applicant is not entitled
    to variance relief. **\[ Hanson v. Manning, 115 N.H. 367 \[1970\]
    \].**

-   What are the special conditions ("uniqueness") of the property
    claimed by the applicant? _________________

-   Do you think that these special conditions truly exist? Y / N

-   ...and are caused by the property itself ? Y / N

-   Is this condition actually unique? Y / N

### Prong 5 (A) relationship test

"Describe the special conditions of the property that distinguish it
from other properties in the area".

"Owing to the special conditions identified above, please indicate how
no fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public
purposes of the ordinance and the specific application of that provision
to the property."

"Explain how the special conditions of the property and the zoning
restriction interferes with the reasonable use of the property"

No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public
purposes of the ordinance provision and the specific application of that
provision to the property (referred to by some as the **relationship
test**) \[ **ZBANHaHfLO page II-15 \]**

-   What is the *purpose* of the zoning provision?    _______________

-   Is there any fair and substantial relationship between the
    application of the zoning provision on this property to the
    purpose of the zoning provision? Y / N

### Prong 5 (B) reasonable use test

The applicant must establish that, because of the special conditions of
the property, the proposed use is reasonable. (referred to by some as
the **reasonable use test**) \[ **ZBANHaHfLO page II-15 \]**

-   Would "the landowner's proposed use would alter the essential
    character of the neighborhood" ? **\[ John R. Harrington & a. v.
    Town of Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 81 (2005); Farrar v. City of Keene,
    158 N.H. 684 (2009). \]** Y / N

<!-- -->

-   Is this illegal "spot zoning", altering the rules for one property
    that is no different than other properties? **\[ Bosse v.
    Portsmouth, 107 N.H. 523(1967) \]** Y / N


-   "If the land is reasonably suited for a \[ singular \] permitted
    use, no hardship can be found." **\[ ZBANHaHfLO page D-6 \]
    "**Landowners went before the Pelham ZBA for a variance to replace
    the one-car garage on their nonconforming lot with a larger
    two-car garage. Neighbors appealed the granting of the variance to
    the superior court, claiming that the requisite unnecessary
    hardship did not exist in this case, where the landowners simply
    wanted a larger garage. The supreme court noted that the hardship
    cited was a result of the landowners' personal circumstances; that
    a one-car garage or even no garage would still be a reasonable use
    consistent with the ordinance and that therefore the superior
    court erred as a matter of law in finding unnecessary hardship
    supporting the grant of a variance." **\[ Crossley v. Town of
    Pelham, 133 N.H. 215 (1990) \]**

    -   What are the permitted uses for the land in that zone?  ________________

    -   Is this land reasonably suited for **one** of those uses even without
        a variance? Y / N

Board Decision
--------------

The \[ zoning \] board shall use one voting method consistently for all
applications until it formally votes to change the method. Any change in
the board\'s voting method shall not take effect until 60 days after the
board has voted to adopt such change... **\[ RSA 764:33 I (c) \]**

"Upon receipt of any application for action pursuant to this section,
the zoning board of adjustment shall begin formal consideration and
shall approve or disapprove such application within 90 days of the date
of receipt, provided that the applicant may waive this requirement and
consent to such extension as may be mutually agreeable. If a zoning
board of adjustment determines that it lacks sufficient information to
make a final decision on an application and the applicant does not
consent to an extension, the board may, in its discretion, deny the
application without prejudice, in which case the applicant may submit a
new application for the same or substantially similar request for
relief" **\[ RSA 764:33 VIII \]**

There are multiple things that the ZBA can do with this variance
application including

-   Reject it without prejudice as an incomplete application

-   Reject it as incorrect subject matter for a variance

-   Reject it as considered but not approved

-   Table it / reschedule it for a future date (perhaps after a site
    visit)

-   Approve it with conditions

-   Approve it without conditions

For any of these, one member should make a motion. If it is seconded, it
can then be voted on. If the vote has a majority, it passes. If not,
then another motion may be made.

Caution, however, should be exercised not to treat the decision-making
process merely as a tabulation of votes on the various approval
requirements by each member. Failure to satisfy any one of the review
criteria is grounds for denial and that "passing" on 3 of the 5 variance
criteria should not result in an approval of the appeal. There should be
one clearly stated motion to "approve for the following reasons..." or
to "disapprove for the following reasons...," duly seconded, discussed,
and voted upon III-17 THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT IN NH 2023 -- NH OPD by
the whole board. If the motion fails, members have the ability to make a
different motion to then act upon. Failure of a motion does not mean
that the opposite prevails. **\[ ZBANHaHfLO page III-16 \]**

Notes
-----

- _______________________________________________________

- _______________________________________________________

- _______________________________________________________

- _______________________________________________________

- _______________________________________________________

- _______________________________________________________

- _______________________________________________________

References
----------

-   RSA that empowers ZBA
    [[https://gencourt.state.nh.us/rsa/html/LXIV/674/674-33.htm]{.underline}](https://gencourt.state.nh.us/rsa/html/LXIV/674/674-33.htm)

-   Weare Zoning Ordinance
    [[https://www.weare.nh.gov/sites/g/files/vyhlif5161/f/pages/2019_zoning_ordinance.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.weare.nh.gov/sites/g/files/vyhlif5161/f/pages/2019_zoning_ordinance.pdf)

-   The Zoning Board of Adjustment in New Hampshire: A Handbook for
    Local Officials ("ZBANHaHfLO")
    [[https://www.nheconomy.com/getmedia/0856bc80-8b19-4021-aff2-0a639c68902c/2023-ZBA-Handbook-FINAL_1.pdf]{.underline}](https://www.nheconomy.com/getmedia/0856bc80-8b19-4021-aff2-0a639c68902c/2023-ZBA-Handbook-FINAL_1.pdf)

